# SMT File arising from mlkem-native for CVC5

This directory contains the SMT files generated by CBMC for verification
of the mlkem-native cryptographic library, and results comparing the
performance of cvc5 with z3 on these examples

## Tool Versions for these experiments

CBMC: 6.8.0
Z3: 4.15.3
cvc5: 1.3.3
GNU parallel: 20250122 (get from Homebrew on macOS or apt-get on Linux)

All running on Apple Silicon M1/macOS 26.4.1

## Reproducing the files

1. Checkout the [mlkem-native repo](https://github.com/pq-code-package/mlkem-native)
2. Checkout the "cvc5_benchmarks" branch
3. Start the nix shell with `nix develop --experimental-features 'nix-command flakes'`
4. cd proofs/cbmc
5. ./run-cbmc-proofs.sh --summarize --no-coverage --cvc5 -j8

These commands produce `*/gotos/*.smtcp` below the `proofs/cbmc` directory.

The .smtcp files are those produced by CBMC, but with all `get-value` and `set-option: produce-models`
lines removed.

These files are then copied to a working checkout of this repository, and renamed to restore
then .smt2 extension. We also remove SMT files where there is no "check-sat" command - this can
happen when a function is so trivially OK that CBMC find no properties to verify.

## Results

See the doboth.sh script in this directory. This runs Z3 and cvc5 with a 20-second
timeout on all 153 files.

Initial experiments showed that cvc5 needs the `--array-exp` and `--enum-inst` options
to process these files with any chance of success.  The script actually
reads:

```shell
#!/bin/zsh
for I in *.smt2
do
   RZ=`z3 -T:20 $I`
   R5=`cvc5 --tlimit=20000 --arrays-exp --enum-inst $I`
   echo $I "z" $RZ "c" $R5
   echo $I "z" $RZ "c" $R5 >>resboth.txt
done
```

Results are in `resboth.txt`

With those options, an analysis of those results yields

```
z3   unsat cvc5 unsat:   121
z3   unsat cvc5 timeout:  19
z3 timeout cvc5 unsat:     4
z3 timeout cvc5 timeout:   9

z3   unsat cvc5 unknown:   0
z3 timeout cvc5 unknown:   0

Total: 153
```

# Conclusions (so far...)

1. `--arrays-exp` is mandatory to get reasonable results with cvc5. This needs to be a safe/stable option, or made the default.
2. `--produce-models` or `(set-option :produce-models true)` in the SMT file degrades cvc5's performance. It might be better for
CBMC to run cvc5 without those options first, then re-enable them following a "sat" result only.
3. cvc5 struggles to find quantifier instantiations where z3 succeeds. See [detailed analysis](./polyvec_ntt_analysis.md) produced by
Clause Opus 4.6 for this problem.
