# Cryptographic code program verification benchmarks for cvc5

This repo contains sets of SMT file arising from the verification of
cryptographic libraries, designed to demonstrate the performance
of cvc5 on these problems, and to inspire further improvement in cvc5's
abilities.

Furthermore, we hope these examples will set a standard for other
intermediate languages and their VC Generators to match up to.

## Goal - Complete, Sound, Fast

The ultimate goal is to achieve proofs of these libaries which are
both complete and sound.

Complete - meaning that running cvc5 on _all_ SMT files returns "unsat".

Sound - meaning that we can use cvc5's proof artefact production facilities
and proof chcking tools like `ethos` to check the validity of every proof.

Fast - Complete proof (from scratch with no caching) should complete in a
small number of seconds - fast enough for an interactive developer, or
for an AI feedback loop.

## Why do we think these are complete?

All of these proofs have been completed by some portfolio
of other solvers, including z3, bitwuzla, and alt-ergo.

In theory, a single solver like cvc5 should be able to
handle all of them.

## Libraries represented here

There are currently three sets of benchmarks in this repo.

See the README.md files in each subdirectory for details and results.

## SPARKNaCl

Rod Chapman's SPARK implementation of the NaCl cryptographic library.
SMT files comes from the Why3 VC Generator, and illustrate its
"lots of small SMT files" apporach. Over 6000 SMT files here, some
of which require non-trivial reasoning.

For this benchmark, there is also a distint subdirectory containing
the SMT files generarated for Z3 - illustrating Why3's ability
to generate SMT that is specialized for a particular prover.

## LibMLKEM

Rod Chapman's SPARK implementation of the ML-KEM algorithm.
Originally, this was a side-project used as a vehicle to
review the ML-KEM specification. Why3 VCG again.

## mlkem-native

AWS' production implementation of ML-KEM. These SMT files
establish memory- and type-safety of the C code components
of the library. Generated by the CBMC back-end. Very different
style from Why3, since CBMC generates "one big SMT file per
function", so far fewer files, but much bigger and more challenging
to prove.
