# SMT Files arising from LibHQC for cvc5

This directory contains the SMT files generated by SPARK Pro (Why3 VC Generator)
for verification of the LibMLKEM cryptographic library, and results showing the
performance of cvc5 on these examples.

The Why3 VCG is very different from other tools. Unlike Boogie and CBMC, Why3
generates roughly "one SMT file per path per assertion". This generates
*lots* of *small* SMT files that can be processed in parallel.

## Tool Versions for these experiments

GNATprove (SPARK Pro): 15.1.0-1

Why3: 1.7.1

cvc5: 1.3.4

GNU parallel: 20250122 (get from Homebrew on macOS or apt-get on Linux)

## Reproducing the files

1. You'll need GNATprove 15.1.0-1 from [here](https://github.com/alire-project/GNAT-FSF-builds/releases/tag/gnatprove-15.1.0-1)
and put "gnatprove" on your PATH.
2. Checkout the [LibMLKEM repo](https://github.com/awslabs/LibMLKEM) or just ask @rodchap for the sources.
3. Put your chosen version of cvc5 on PATH
4. Genereate SMT files with

```
cd spark_ada
gnatprove -Pmlkem --prover=cvc5 --debug-save-vcs -u src/mlkem.adb
```

5. Generated SMT files end up in `spark_ada/obj/gnatprove` directory

6. Before adding SMT files to this repo, I also removed the final
`(get-info :reason-unknown)` line from each file.

## Results

This benchmark runs a sequential portfolio of cvc5 instances on each SMT file.
See the script `cvc5p5seqr.sh` in this directory.

The portfolio is a sequential "first past the post" set up, running cvc5
with the following options in order. First one to return "unsat" wins.
We have assigned a short name to each set of options as follows:
```
DEF:   cvc5 --rlimit-per=1000000
FMFEI: cvc5 --rlimit-per=5500000 --finite-model-find --enum-inst
DI:    cvc5 --rlimit-per=5000000 --decision=internal
MQO:   cvc5 --rlimit-per=5000000 --miniscope-quant=off
BVI:   cvc5 --rlimit-per=5000000 --solve-bv-as-int=sum
```

Note that we use the ``--rlimit-per`` switch to gain stability over
multiple test platforms.

The script `p5allr.sh` in this directory runs that portfolio over
each SMT of the 624 SMT files, but using C CPUs in parallel,
where C is the result of running `nproc` command.

Results are in the file `allr.res`

### cvc5 1.3.3 results

With that portfolio, cvc5 1.3.3 reports "unsat" on 619 files, with only 5 timeouts.

The breakdown of results by portfolio member is as follows:
```
DEF:     588
FMFEI:    20
DI:        6
MQO:       2
BVI:       3
Timeout:   5
------------
Total:   624
```

The 5 timeouts are

```
$ grep -v unsat allr.res
mlkem.adb_1318_31_loop_variant_1.smt2 timeout(ALL)
mlkem.adb_1496_20_predicate_check_1.smt2 timeout(ALL)
mlkem.adb_1499_36_loop_invariant_init_1.smt2 timeout(ALL)
mlkem.adb_1502_44_index_check2_1.smt2 timeout(ALL)
mlkem.adb_880_13_loop_invariant_preserv_1.smt2 timeout(ALL)
```

### cvc5 1.3.4 results

With that portfolio, cvc5 1.3.4 reports "unsat" on 618 files, with 6 timeouts.

The breakdown of results by portfolio member is as follows:
```
DEF:     589
FMFEI:    18
DI:        5
MQO:       2
BVI:       4
Timeout:   6
------------
Total:   624
```

The 6 timeouts are

```
$ grep -v unsat allr.res
mlkem.adb_1318_31_loop_variant_1.smt2 timeout(ALL)
mlkem.adb_1496_20_predicate_check_1.smt2 timeout(ALL)
mlkem.adb_1499_36_loop_invariant_init_1.smt2 timeout(ALL)
mlkem.adb_1572_20_predicate_check_1.smt2 timeout(ALL)
mlkem.adb_878_25_assert2_1.smt2 timeout(ALL)
mlkem.adb_880_13_loop_invariant_preserv_1.smt2 timeout(ALL)
```

This is a concern. cvc5 1.3.4 has regressed in performance on this benchmark.


# Conclusions (so far...)

Good result. We are _close_ to a full proof of an entire cryptographic algorithm/library
using only a single prover.

Performance is disappointing. Using 10 processor cores on a Apple Silicon M1 MacBook Pro,
the proof takes about 15 minutes real time. There are some _long_ waits while some members of the portfolio timeout.
